---
title: Compassion and Understanding  Cornerstones of Spiritual Living 
prev: docs/SRF Talks/Jan092026.md
next: docs/SRF Talks/Jan2320236.md
---

It's hard to see you with this lights shining right in front of us but we can make out and so to all of you Prome it's always a great joy to be able to attend convocation and to speak of Guruji's immortal teachings. Before we begin this evening I thought it would be nice to just sort of clarify in our minds a few salient points about the words we've been used in the title about compassion and understanding.

Compassion comes from medieval English which then came from Latin and means basically to sympathise the meaning and so compassion is sympathetic concern for the suffering of another together with an inclination to give aid or offer support or show mercy. Now one definition of love interestingly enough is a feeling of kindness or brotherhood toward others. In other words the same thing we find understanding is the quality of or state of one who understands and to understand comes from medieval English and before that from old English from unstandon to stand under and so to know or be tolerant or sympathetic toward and wisdom is also from medieval English and old English from uh this or vise understanding of what is true right or lasting.

And so we see basically if we stop and think of these words there's one word that can really cover all of them and that word is love.
{{% callout type="info" %}} Compassion and love are the same and so is understanding and so is wisdom all four words convey the same concept. {{% /callout %}}
And that is no doubt why the saints speak of the two different paths the path of wisdom and the path of love as really being one path and that at the end of that path those two paths merge and are no longer seen by the devity as separate paths but two aspects of the same one path. So the apparent opposites reconcile and merge into one and the devity eventually realizes that wisdom becomes love and love expresses wisdom. Notice we said the devity realizes because it seems that a certain degree of spiritual wisdom is needed for this to happen.

### The Greatest Commandment

Now what is the greatest commandment that we can follow in life? Jesus said the most important thing we can do in order to reclaim our soul consciousness is:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart all thy mind all thy soul and with all thy strength". {{% /callout %}}
In other words to love God completely with every aspect of our being and the second most important commandment like unto it is to "love thy neighbor as thyself" to learn to treat others in other words as we want to be treated. We all want to be treated with love and understanding and compassion but do we treat others that way? It's interesting facet of human nature that often we don't and yet stop and think about it is there one single one of us here this evening that does not want to be loved? We all want to be loved it's natural we want to be loved. Is there any single one of us here who does not want to be happy full of joy? Of course not we all want that. I have travelled around the world and as I sometimes say in talks of this nature I've been to many many different countries talked with people from all types of cultures i've never one time had one of them come up to me and say "Brother I'm too happy can you teach me how to become more miserable?"

### The Law of Karma

But there are many times you hear the opposite that one's life is full of misery and they want to find out how to be happy. So compassion and understanding for others is one way to make our own life happy because the very nature of the law of karma is that which we sent out from us eventually returns back to us. It may come instantly may come in a day a week a month a year a lifetime five lifetimes 10 lifetimes so we've completely forgotten that we sent that type of action out of ourselves and we then wonder why me why is this happening to me. We can be sure it is because we sent that out sometime and to now take care of that karma to mitigate that karma we have to go through that experience.

Now Lord Krishna taught the same thing he said:

{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Absorb thy mind in me become my devity resign all things to me bow down to me forsaking all other duties remember me alone". {{% /callout %}}
And also:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "The best type of yogi is he who feels for others whether in grief or pleasure even as he feels for himself". {{% /callout %}}
So we see the great masters not only spoke of this but when we look in their lives they lived it they exemplified it. If we are to love our neighbors as our self we have to first understand what our self is because we tend to think of our self as the ego because we're familiar with it but that is not us. We are the soul. The soul automatically has compassion and understanding the ego automatically thinks only of itself so we have to forget that ego self which is constantly thinking I I I I.

Now Jesus did not mean that we should love our neighbors in a narrow sense not in a exclusive way that is attached to their forms or personalities that again is human love and that is not what he wants us to practice because human love always needs human meriting because again the ego is connected with it and remember ego is thinking of self. And so a person will say to someone I love you but then if that individual they say they love does not act in the way they would like i don't love you anymore.

{{% callout type="info" %}} Human love demands human meriting divine love is completely different divine love gives its very nature of love is to give and it gives and gives and gives and demands nothing in return. {{% /callout %}}
I think we can see from that that this is not an ego state of consciousness but soul consciousness spiritual consciousness.

### Teachings of Shri Daya Mata

Our beloved president Shri Diamadji expresses through her life and words how we may practice the guru's teachings and techniques and to realize these immortal truths in our lives and I want to quote from her she said:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Think of all that God has endowed us with that sets us apart from the tree or the animal is it not an insult of ingratitude when we do not use rightly this self that is made in his image?" {{% /callout %}}
"While I am busily engaged in pondering on the worldwide problems of this society while I'm standing out of doors doing my exercises or while I am walking on the grounds among the trees and flowers no matter what I am doing it is the simplest thing in the world to recollect my thoughts for a moment and say inwardly:

{{% callout type="quote" %}} I love you God i don't know anything else but I love you and I ask you always to give me enough strength enough understanding enough courage enough compassion to serve my fellow man to love them as I would be loved to love them as I feel your love flowing over my consciousness". {{% /callout %}}
Wasn't that a beautiful way to express that i remember when I'd only been in the ashram a few years and we had just built the Janakananda ashram for the monks and we had our own little meditation chapel in it we had invited Sri Diamati to come down and formally inaugurate our chapel by having a meditation with us. It was some time before she was able to do so now in those early years Diamada no doubt seeing what undeveloped qualities and undeveloped devities she was working with would often express her feelings toward the divine in meditation in words audible words so we could all hear and hopefully you know it would sink in.

So when she had this meditation with us after she had meditated with us for a while she started talking to divine mother and she was poured out her heart with such love with such devotion with such yearning that I literally felt as though my heart would break. It felt as if it was like a dish rag and someone was just ringing it out and I remember thinking to myself inwardly why can't I love you that way because that expression of her love was so palatable so compelling that you would have had to been a rock not to feel it and as she went on and that inner yearning increased I couldn't contain myself anymore i just started crying like a child.

Then a fascinating thing happened the ego reared its ugly head and it said "Oh what are the other monks going to think about you you've only been here a couple of years and here you are doing this they'll probably think you're just faking it for the you know putting on a show". And so I tried everything I could to hold it back gritting my teeth and everything but I couldn't it was too powerful so I stifled those so as best I could. The meditation finally ended daimodi went around and blessed each one of us separately and said a few words to each monk individually when she came to me she only said one sentence:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Never be ashamed to cry for God." {{% /callout %}}
The great saint of India Shri Rama Krishna Pararmahansa said:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Love for God washes away the mud of delusion". {{% /callout %}}
That's it those tears of love for God wash away the mud of delusion and therefore prepare the devity for a greater understanding and ability to express in that devity's life those qualities that are spiritual that are divine those qualities Gurave mentions in the god talks with Arjuna in his gita the 26 divine qualities that we all need to develop.
{{% callout type="info" %}} So Diamadi said "We have within us the power to change this world." {{% /callout %}}

### Inner Business and Simplicity

We must begin with ourselves through deep meditation. Normally what we do if we see something we don't think is right we want everyone else to change. Why is that person that way why do they treat me that way why don't they change always starts here we must change and that is basically what she went on talking about pour out that heart to God.
Mistake we often make as devotees that I see in talking to devotees and this includes devotees who have been meditating a long time we forget after practicing the techniques to spend more time too often we think "Oh got that taken care of now I can go about my business." No now the business you have to go about is the inner business of talking to God or guru pouring out your heart to them. You've prepared yourself you made the connection take advantage of it pour out your heart give your love ask if you need for help nothing wrong kuri said there is much the devity does not receive because we do not ask but ask for wise things.

Okay so the more we get caught up in delusion the more you see that delusion is complex and that you might say the devil is in the details. I want to go over this story of Guruji's in the autobiography where he met the saint at the Kiggot temple who told him:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "God is simple everything else is complex do not seek absolute values in the relative world of nature". {{% /callout %}}
And so Guruji turned to the tall man who had addressed him said his garb or rather lack of it revealing him as a wandering sawdue you have indeed penetrated the bewilderment of my thoughts i smiled gratefully. The confusion of benign and terrible aspects in nature as symbolized by Collie has puzzled wiser heads than mine few there be who solve her mystery good and evil is the challenging riddle which life places sphinx like before every intelligence. Here and there a towering lonely figure never cries defeat from the maya of duality he plucks the cleaveless truth of unity. You speak with conviction sir i have long exercised an honest introspection exquisitely painful approach to wisdom.
{{% callout type="info" %}} Self-crutiny relentless observance of one's thoughts is a stark and shattering experience it pulverizes the stoutest ego but true selfanalysis mathematically operates to produce sears. {{% /callout %}}

The way of self-expression results in egotists sure of their right to their private interpretations of God and the universe. Truth humbly retires no doubt master said before such arrogant originality and then this saint went on that the human mind beared to a century slime is teeming with repulsive life of countless world illusions these soldiers of ignorant lust seek to slay us all. Thoughtless is the man who buries his ideals surrendering to the common fate may he seem other than impotent wouldn't ignominius respected sir have you no sympathy for the masses.

You see how Gurji he was just a youth here he met this saint and he called him a saint but if you as you read the story you see Guruji in talking with him was also pulling out something of his that was hidden and that was that compassion he had not been expressing that before. Now Guruji began to work on him to pull it out. Have you no sympathy for the bewildered masses the sage was silent for a moment then observed obliquely:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "To love both the invisible God repository of all virtues and visible man apparently possessed of none is often baffling but ingenuity is equal to the maze inner research soon exposes a unity of all human minds... it ripens into compassion for one's fellows blind to the healing potencies of the soul awaiting exploration". {{% /callout %}}

And so see then Guruji encouraged him that he said the saints of every age sir have felt like yourself for the sorrows of the world he pulled more of it out of him. Only the shallow man loses responsiveness to the woes of others lives as he sinks into the narrow suffering of his own. The sadu a stirface was noticeably softened the one who practices a scalpel selfdeceptction will know an expansion of universal pity release is given him from the deafening demands of his ego.

{{% callout type="info" %}} The love of God flowers on such soil the creature finally turns to his creator if for no other reason than to ask in anguish "Why Lord why?" {{% /callout %}}
By ignoble whips of pain man is driven at last into the infinite presence whose beauty alone should lure him that's quite a condemnation of human nature isn't it and yet I must admit in all honesty that is exactly what drove me on the spiritual path it wasn't love of God it was whips of pain and how can I escape them because we don't want that do we.

### Bliss as the Ultimate Feeling

Now the fascinating thing about this tremendous powerful feeling of love is that it is not the most powerful feeling one can have. If we analyze it we see that love brings joy love brings such an intense happiness it is beyond happiness it's joy it's bliss love is a harbinger the calling card a bliss and that's what we're really seeking that bliss can be so intoxicating and that is the ultimate highest feeling surprisingly enough not love it is bliss.
I remember one time when I was working long hours in the print shop in their early days and I was up in the print shop all by myself and I was having to work long hours then and I was somewhat resenting it because I was the only one in the print shop putting in those long hours i'd be up there every night by myself working while everyone else was off doing whatever and at first I resented it and as long as I resented it it was miserable. Finally I surrendered to it i said "All right guru i gave my life to you if this is what you want me to do so be it i accept it." And then things begin to change just that one thing and I remember one night up there late at night I was up there setting type on the old line of type machine setting an article of masters for the magazine and suddenly I began to feel such joy i couldn't contain myself i started singing at the top of my lungs.

The yogis define God as Sat-Chit-Ananda:
• Sat: is life being existence.
• Chit: consciousness or awareness of that existence.
• Ananda: bliss.
So God is ever conscious ever new blissful existence and as souls we are an individualized ray of that ever conscious ever new blissful existence. Now how often walking down the street do we see someone reflecting that not often is it which shows the nature of the world we're in and shows also the nature of my robe which has come unhooked see that's the way delusion is there's always a fly in the ointment it just works that way so we might as well get used to it and not be upset by it.

{{% callout type="info" %}} The way to peace joy happiness and love divine is to keep your consciousness centered on and rest in God. {{% /callout %}}
Daimos said:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Concentrate night and day on God and become drunk with his love he alone is real in his love lies wisdom humility joy compassion understanding and fulfillment." {{% /callout %}}
Fulfillment may each one of us seek that love more earnestly now don't think we have to wait until January the 1st until the new year to start to change our lives why not make this day the first day of a new year in which we will change our lives by becoming more focused in our spiritual efforts by becoming more willing to express to God our feelings and our love and by becoming more willing to try and love and Express compassion and understanding to others.

### Breaking the Cage of Ego

If we do we will see that our lives will begin to change our true nature is infinite there's an ancient yogic scripture reputed to be 5,000 years old and has a fascinating sutra in it think of this:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "He who is everywhere is joyous". {{% /callout %}}
Who is everywhere? Soul is everywhere the ego is caged in this form break the cage let the soul go out joy is a natural result of that. The titia ponyisha declares:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "From joy we have come in joy we live and have our being and in that sacred joy we will one day melt again". {{% /callout %}}
That's what we're all seeking that's what we all want and that's what we can all have and Guruji has come to not only show us the way but to give us the tools to make it happen but he can't do it for us we have to make the effort. So Gerji says speaking to the devotees you must live differently than the ordinary man who is in touch only with sense consciousness. That's why we have meditation other techniques of devotion and so forth. Spiritual consciousness lies in absolute victory over human consciousness.
{{% callout type="info" %}} Spirituality does not mean only to meditate it embraces a wide field of controlled existence however meditation is the best foundation it is the greatest way to be spiritual the simplest way to spiritualize the consciousness you must not only meditate you must also learn to behave. {{% /callout %}}

That's the hard one because in the beginning it's natural for the human ego we want to have both we want to meditate we want to have God and his bliss and we at the same time want to have all these other little goody things that we think we need to make us happy. We have to learn to behave to treat others rightly to treat ourselves rightly because often we are very hard on ourselves also we may forgive someone else and not forgive ourselves hold that thing over our head. I sometimes tell this to devotees why are you beating up on yourself so you made a mistake we all do forget it you can't change it by remembering it it's already done forget it and move on in a better way. But what do many people do they worship their mistakes they take them and place them up on the altar and every so often they take them down and beat themselves with it a few times and then put it back up there and worship it again throw it away forget it move ahead.

### Treachery and Forgiveness

Now spiritual law is very powerful we should not go against spiritual principles master said never deceive or be treacherous. Treachery is probably the worst thing we can do really because it is always premeditated the very act of treachery to be treacherous you have to plan it out so it never happens that you just sort of get into it you have thought it out and master said as a result it is the one sin that is hard to be forgiven meaning what you have to work it out the hard way.

Guruji in the early years brought over a swami they had been childhood friends to help him in the work because the work was becoming too large. This man unfortunately was treacherous and when Gerie was back traveling and trying to raise funds to support the work and to pay off the mortgage at Mother's Center he was there and he talked to as many of the disciples as he could to follow him took all the money that he could get out of the banks even took some of the furniture and left and went on to start his own organization. So Gerji came back money was gone some devotees were gone i mean he had to basically start all over again.
Imagine that that kind of treachery and yet Diamodi told us that he would for Christmas send this man a present and he would return it unopened. This path he forsook his swami vows he got married he eventually became a professor at a university because he had degrees master sent him that present and he returned it diam said "Sir why do you do this?" And master said:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Because he's my disciple... Someday he has to come back to me because that's the only way he can get free". {{% /callout %}}
Look at that compassion complete compassion on someone who had done such a terrible thing to him and master didn't just talk these words he walked the path he lived that.

### Childlike Devotion

The problem we have with God usually in things of this nature we think we love God and we try to love God we seek to love God more but we're still fickle because we haven't yet got deep enough into spiritual consciousness to rise beyond some of these negative traits. So master said one time God doesn't think very much of himself he's so great he doesn't know it he has an inferiority complex and I think part of that comes from his human children who so many times say "Oh God I love you please come to me i want you." And then he dangles some little thing in front of us some little toy of this world that we want whether perhaps a raise a new job a new car a new home a new relationship whatever that we want he says "How about this you can have this." Oh I can god is instantly forgotten and so naturally he's become a little shy.

We have to learn how to be understanding with others and I think that only comes as we begin to open up some more of that compassion. Meditation will bring it eventually combine it with devotion it will come faster keep trying and don't give up practice the presence of God it will come faster still.

I want to finish with these words from Guruji's commentary on the New Testament:
{{% callout type="quote" %}} "I thank thee oh heavenly father... that although you have hidden yourself and your omniscience from egotistically ally wise and theoretically prudent individuals you have revealed the mystery of truth unto your simple guish children even though they are but babes in wisdom before your incomparable infinite mind". {{% /callout %}}
Heavenly Father the revealing of yourself and ultimate truth unto your devities who are humbly simple and sincere spiritual babes who surrender their sensate intelligence unto the unlimited intuitional inspiration that comes from thee is in accord with thy proper judgment.
Divine realization perception of the infinite is unrealized to academic degrees. It is good to have knowledge befitting a professor in preference to aulish brain of an ignorant man but if one's intellect is so complacent in its scholarly distinction that one feels no need to seek wisdom in God the evolution of that soul is lagardly compared to an illiterate who has devotion to the Lord.

{{% callout type="info" %}} God chooses those who choose him. {{% /callout %}}
Whoever approaches him with pure devotion will attain him god reveals himself unto those who completely surrender themselves unto him those who have no intellectual or emotional resistance to him. You see even though we've received these beautiful techniques and crea yoga even though we may practice crea yoga perfectly we cannot force God to appear by that practice. If we could the technique would be greater than God that's why Gurji said ka yoga plus devotion ka takes you right up to the door devotion opens the door surrender opens the door.

We leave and go to the astral we're not going to be asked did you attain this position were you a president or were you a vice president. God's going to want to know:
• Did you love?
• Were you compassionate?
• Were you thoughtful and helpful to others?

Those are the questions we will be asked inner attainments not outer ones. That devity becomes filled with intuitive wisdom who is childlike and gulessness free of presumption and doubt full of sincerity humble and receptive such a one is filled with compassion and understanding that devity finds God.
There is not one single one of you here who cannot because there's nothing you have to gain you already have it you only have to get rid of the mud of delusion. Remember Lori Mahashaya's words:

{{% callout type="quote" %}} "Banat Banat Banat Jai" (Making, making, one day made) or "Keep on keeping on". {{% /callout %}}
That's it keep on keeping on thank you God bless guru remember love your guru don't let him become just a picture on the All don't let him become that make him a reality in your heart.